don't try to out deep voice me okay I so
how deep can you take your voice
probably right about in here like below
audio frequency levels I don't know it's
that deep let me say I haven't done this
in a while okay I'm
Morpheus
no I'm
Morpheus why can't I be Morpheus because
you're
not because I am
[Music]
this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
here your personal astrophysicist and
today we are joining a one-on-one
exclusive conversation with someone whom
I'm proud to call my friend Lawrence
Fishburn Lawrence Neil
how are you man welcome thank you this
is so great thank you for having me man
I'm so excited to be here this is your
first time back at the Hayden
planetarium I haven't been to the Hayden
planetarium since I was a boy probably
oh my gosh walked by many times but yeah
cuz when I was a boy I came by and it
was like I'm doing this for Life yes
exactly I wanted to live here too but I
wasn't that good in science I liked it
but I wasn't that good wait a minute you
told me your mama taught science my mama
was a science teacher yeah okay so then
how that square well I found this other
little thing that I was good at oh this
little thing you know that little acting
thing the little play acting thing and
it kind of worked out for me so you know
kind of worked out kind of worked out
yeah so I just look at your catalog oh
my gosh it's not just deep but it's
Broad and I'm looking at it I saying if
I were an actor that's kind of how I'd
want to be oh man because as an actor
you you act this way and act that way
and act this other way and if you're
always doing the same thing that's not
acting it's not as much fun I mean it's
fun for some people some people like
they do the thing they find the thing it
works for them they do that it's cool
for me I I'm just I'm a kind of a
curious person yeah so I'm interested in
stuff that I don't know and learning
about stuff that I don't know so by the
way that Curiosity most of us lose in
childhood and as an adult you get
comfortable
yes sure but as an actor it's good to
have that kind of curiosity because you
never know what kind of part you're
going to play If you're looking for
something different every time like I am
plus you want people to if you're not
always in control of what Ro is offered
exctly and you want to at least give the
options yes to those and you want to
keep learning I mean I want to keep
learning so my curiosity has just drove
me to I'm just looking at this you how
many people know you were in Apocalypse
Now no a few people
okay I'd say a few people don't okay you
had a bit roll in Apocalypse I was I was
one of the four guys on a boat heading
up River with Martin Sheen to go and
assassinate Marlon Brando's character
right you were one of the young I was a
young sailor on this Bo sailor on the
boat and I remember you you I don't know
if you confided in me whatever it's a
little late now that you were like
underage at the time how old were you
yeah so I auditioned for the movie I was
14 years old got the part they asked me
how old I was in the interview I lied
and said I was 16 uhhuh they knew that I
was lying but they just hired me anyway
it wasn't like my lie convinced them to
hire me it wasn't that you know a lot of
guys if you go back you see these
documentaries about World War I you
discover that there were many boys 16
17 who enlisted who lied about their age
and they were conscripted anyway and
they went to war okay so you were 14
lied and told him you were 16 and you
were playing an 18-year- old and I was
playing a 17year old 17y old okay so
that's was Apocalypse Now yeah
Apocalypse Now 1976 1977 and you know
boys in the hood John Wick John oh my
gosh that's just fun mindless
entertainment John Wick yeah style above
content uh fighting fighting yeah me
some good fighting you know yeah it's
all good you know even I forgotten you
and I'm blackish blackish yep as as the
grandfather grumpy Grand Grandpa yeah
grumpy grandfather Pops that was fun CSI
where I played a scientist yes
television peewee's Playhouse where I
played the Cowboy Curtis Curtis yeah
yeah peewee's Playhouse yeah peewee's
Playhouse yeah man good fun uh so what I
thought was Broad and diverse wasn't
even the full story not quite okay all
right so you played a scientist on CSI
were you the in the morg no I was not
the guy in the morg I basically replaced
William Peterson when William Peterson
who was the bugman left okay my guy came
in I was a guy named Ray Langston who
was a pathologist so which CSI was this
in the pantheon of CSI it was in the
original CSI which took place in Vegas I
didn't remember that yeah okay yeah 9 10
and 11 you must know CSI ended up it
became so successful as a force of
attraction mhm for people who might want
to become scientists I didn't know that
yes oh wow and at least anecdotally
there were chemistry professors say why
why are all these women now in the class
that wouldn't weren't there oh I saw uh
scientists on CSI because they were real
people portrayed with real social lives
personal lives they were not just the in
the lab nerd lab scientist that give me
the answer let's have the real people
move on right they made science sexy
they were the real people yeah and CSI
created a museum exhibit that traveled I
know that's right they did they did they
did it made science sexy it was the way
they shot it and what I used to always
tell people about the show was they were
like oh you're the star of the show I
was like no I'm not the star of the show
I'm like the crime that they're solving
with the scientific method is the star
of the show yes there it is that's the
star of the show science Reigns Supreme
absolutely in every every episode so uh
was that your only time a scientist no
my other time as a scientist was in a
film called contagion that came out in
2009 I played the head of the director
of the CDC nice uh so it was all about
you know tracking down potential
pandemics that were going to happen and
we had a guy who recently passed on a
guy named Elliot who was the head of the
CDC and that was his job and every day
he'd be on the set and he'd be like look
at this look what we're tracking in
Bolivia look at what we're tracking in
Africa adviser yeah and he would be like
we're tracking this in this country
we're tracking this disease in this
country and it was fascinating and then
of course when Co happened it was like
it they it was like they had lifted
everything from the movie and it was
actually happening in real life I
visited the CDC for my very first time
just a couple of months ago oh wow and
they took me deep into the day yeah into
what was basically like the situation
the no I saw this vial of Legionnaire
disease fluid it's like you know it's
like this is their they stud this and so
I went into the room and as a as an
astro person the only analog I have to
this is Mission Control okay okay all
these desks in arcs and a huge wall and
it's a screen of the world right and at
every country there's data there's dat
coming in what disease is there what's
getting track how many people have the
disease how many people have died from
the disease potentially what it will do
if it gets out all of this is
there yes but thank God for them yeah
thank goodness that they exist that
organizations like that they care they
care they care they care so scientist
twice two SCI let me say I'm a little
disappointed given how many movies
you've made okay okay you got to come
through for me now I've done a lot of
Science Fiction though oh yes oh my gosh
I did a little I I looked at the list
and and I'm I'm embarrassed to say I've
seen like only I got to go on a like a
you got fish night you got to have a
Fishburn night you like you get the
movies you line them up I'm going to do
a Fishburn B you get your menu you line
up your menu I got we got to do a
Fishburn binge here and yeah the signal
the signal the signal 2017 okay that's
that was a great one I played not quite
a scientist in that but a guy in a
hazmat suit okay so it kind of
qualifies uh a vent Horizon vent Horizon
Resco passengers contagion contagion The
Colony The Colony oh man w Predators
what was that Predators was uh part of
the Predator franchise okay so it was
that was a predator 3 no no it was it
was like four or something basically the
premise was the Predator collected a
group of really really bad human beings
and dropped them on this planet which is
basically the Predators hunting ground
so it's like a
convict to be bad already they selected
them none of us would miss them I guess
exactly and this is where the Predators
go to practice they hunting wow it was
Adrien Brody myself Mersa Ali Alysia
Braga uh toer early for Maha Ali right
yeah yeah it was it was it was I
everything he's in yeah it was early for
Mersa myself uh Walton
gogins and uh of course um Denny tro
it's a pretty cool movie I got say back
on my list yeah Predators all right mhm
Fantastic Four I didn't Fantastic Four I
voiced the Silver Surfer oh my God yeah
and then of course this little little
thing I did called The Matrix little
freaking Matrix that little movie you
know the Matrix yeah you know I don't
know who saw that I can't even look at
my notes anymore cuz you just distracted
me the Matrix that's my single favorite
movie of all
time really yes I don't know if you're
ready to see what I want to show you NE
but don't don't try to out deep voice me
okay let's try okay okay I want I want
to hear you do as best you can yeah this
is star talk okay this is Star Talk no
you're trying too hard there it's got to
come you need that wasn't
naturalistic no you were forcing that
let me this is star talk I'm
Morpheus
no I'm
Morpheus why can't I be Morpheus because
you're not
because I
am you know we we just lost uh James
Earl Jones Earl Jones great James Earl
Jones I only barely met him I was at a a
premiere of uh On Golden Pond with him
playing opposite Felicia Rashad right
and uh but Darth Vader I mean come on
yeah Luke I am your
father do not overestimate the power of
your technological
Terror let me hear Luke I am your father
go no Luke I am your
father look into your such your feelings
you know to be true plus CNN hasn't been
the same ever since they stopped using
his voice so like they using all the
correspondence is like don't you
understand exactly I just I I would love
that gig no I want the gig you want that
gig no I don't want you to have gig we
might have to fight about it now no no
you lose okay you you ready let's try it
ready let's audition we're going this is
our audition for CNN ready
replacing Mary go first yeah absolutely
this is CNN that's not bad it's actually
pretty good oh this is
CNN oo that sound a little more
authoritative let me go ahead let me try
again all right go ahead cuz you you you
hit you hit the syllable this is my
wheelhouse
BR you know what I mean okay okay all
right all right come on this is CNN nice
nice this is
CNN you got the little breath at the end
there I could put some breath in too you
can put some breath in this is CNN all
right you got it I'm going to just I
acques it's your gig you want you got it
so how deep can take your voice have you
uh probably right about in here like
like below audio frequency levels I I
don't think it's some I don't think it's
that 20 I don't know it's that deep
we're 20 to 20,000 that's the
traditional range yeah actually I just
put it through a thing I go to the
studio and they put it through a thing
and ites take it down and it sounds like
evil
alien let me see I haven't haven't done
this in a while okay and
now oh yeah yeah oh yeah oh
no come on baby okay so now if you can
do that voice then uh it looks like
Morgan Freeman got all the god jobs yeah
he did he did he did get all the
almighties all the almighties he got all
the everlastings and the almighties
yeah okay so you know but you got the
cosmos yeah you can't have a pipsqueak
voice coming out of the universe you
can't that doesn't work no no it's like
burning bush got to be down here you got
to
be it's just a bias we have yeah it does
suppose God's voice was hi everybody I'm
done exactly there's no reason why I
couldn't be high pitched hi I love you
so much I love you all of you are my
children and I love you so much no one
would believe it they would just like
okay all right I'm of the generation
that remembers when Tik Tock was just a
sound that a clock made it seems like
every every day there's a new streaming
service to join and half the time I
forget that I'm even signed up for them
well thanks to our sponsors at Rocket
money you can now stay on top of your
finances and track exactly what you're
paying for that's right with rocket
money you can cancel subscriptions lower
your bills and frankly manage your money
better rocket money may even be able to
help you cancel your unwanted
subscriptions with just a few Taps the
rocket money app and its premium
features have helped its customer save
over $500 million in canceled
subscriptions automatically scanning
your bills to find savings and even
helping to negotiate your bills for you
from internet service to cable and phone
bills to save more and spend less join
the over 5 million members using rocket
money by visiting rocket money.com
StarTalk or by clicking the link in the
description to get started for free
today now back to the show
let me take you to the mat with the
Matrix go let's go so one of the reasons
why it's my favorite film is other than
one little bit where the science they
play loose with the science science okay
by the way I don't mind that provided a
story is internally consistent that's
the big Comic-Con rule really ah okay
okay it's not whether it's real science
or not but if you're going to have a
rule that operates in your story mhm
stick with yeah if you if you set up the
rules of the world I'm perfectly happy
you have to abide by those rules correct
and that's what any video game is that's
any story any story in any Med actually
it's any story in any media that I I
agree and so it did it so well and it
was such a fantasy adventure and and
good and evil and I don't know it was
and it was beautiful to watch yeah and
so just my you know kudos to the the w
absolutely yeah it was a brilliant a
brilliant idea and a brilliant execution
of a brilliant idea apparently rumor
tells that Will Smith's agent was not
convinced by the story enough to have
him play Neo play Neo okay and
so what about the story intrigued you
yes moved to Australia for five months
or whatever for two years basic two
years basically I mean we were there for
three years doing all three movies
essentially um what Drew my interest in
it was it wasn't too weird for you so I
don't know what this is it I understood
it ohood it people couldn't here's the
thing there was a guy that one of the
main producers on it obviously Joel
Silver was one of the producers there's
another guy Nam Lorenzo bonaventura who
was one of the producers and he was I
think the guy who was like showing this
to the studio Executives to the people
who make the decisions and a lot of the
the story is call the shirts or the
jackets the suits whatever the suits uh
so the executives right and uh many of
them were the story is that many of them
just didn't get it they were like we
don't understand this and what I've
heard is that Lorenzo's response to that
was don't worry no one under 30
understands it
anyway wow right okay so I was
34 35 or something when I read it and it
was the most original thing I'd ever
read that didn't
mean that everyone was going to get it
that didn't mean that everybody was
going to understand it that's what my
experience with Apocalypse Now had
taught me because when I made Apocalypse
Now in the 1970s it was the most
expensive movie ever made it was the
most ambitious movie ever made during
that period of time Marlon Brando was in
the movie and Martin Sheen was in the
movie and it was about the Vietnam War
and it was exciting and John milus wrote
the screenplay and all these wonderful
elements but the movie
commercially did not do well it was a
critical success but it was not a
commercial success so I had learned that
even though something on the
page or as a concept is brilliant that
doesn't mean it's going to translate
with an audience particularly an
American audience one never knows the
American audience is fickle is is
Mercurial man it's you know so I just
knew that it was the most original thing
that I had ever read and I understood it
I got it and I wanted to be a part of it
mhm and the timing just so happened that
the way that it all sort of came
together we Shot the movie in 1998 the
movie came out in 1999 the internet was
born in 1998 essentially cell phones
became a reality in 1999 just the
digital world the digital world
descended on everyone on everyone and
essentially what the story is and and
why it resonates with everybody all over
the planet and it did at that at time is
because it's the old myth told in a
digital
format and we were right so it had deep
res yeah we were right at the birth of
the digital age okay and so but is is
that rumor true that Will Smith turned
it down I don't know I've heard that
before but I don't know I've never
really sat down with Will and asked him
about it yeah okay because that when I
heard that I said how does an actor know
what role you should or shouldn't take
you know you know it depends on who you
are and you know what you true to
yourself it doesn't even matter you just
true to yourself yeah I mean it's it's
it's anybody's guess maybe that's the
case I don't know I I've never sat down
and asked will about it okay can I share
with you all my religious observations
on yes please okay yeah uh Catholic
religious Christian Catholic
observations as you are a Catholic well
I was raised raised Catholic right okay
please my doubts yes descended early
yeah well
a religion rifled with doubt yeah but
I'm still fascinated by the fact that
there such a thing as religion in the
world and billions of people practice
that practice it right that intrigues me
as an educator because something is
attracting them what is it and why and
you're this religion over here because
that was the religion of your parents
and you're sure your religion is the one
true religion in the world but so are
these people are just as sure as you and
we'll go to war on that historically
historically correct yes so that's why
religion trees me so in The Matrix so
first Neo that's an anagram of the one
the one you had to dip your head at the
one the one you can't non-act that
expression the one the one so that's the
one right all right he's the Savior
right all right so now watch there
Christ yeah okay so now watch uh early
in the film uh he wakes up from his
right and someone knocking at the door
and apparently he hacked something for
them and is about to give them and so he
say wait a minute he goes back rummages
through a thing gives him a disc right
and the guy says thanks you know okay
you're my savior you're my regular Jesus
Christ yeah you're my own personal Jesus
Christ that's a script line that's right
there okay yeah it's right there right
there okay but let's not stop there MH
all right so we keep going there's the
part where he gets brought into the
Nebuchadnezzar for the first time so
he's still wrapped and looking around
and there's Joe Jo pants Joey pants yeah
Jo pantono Pantano Pantano and he's
there and he's just looking and then
that character Cipher is startled and he
says oh you scared the Jesus out of
me yeah that's two okay so hang on
that's two yeah hang on yeah who who
betrays the group Cypher Cypher yes he
betray he's the Judas who he's Judas
yeah he's the Judas he's Judas yeah
after but Jesus was scared out yeah he
doesn't have Jesus in him he doesn't
have Jesus in him okay n all right what
let me keep going keep going okay if you
can cuz you think you know the movie
better than I do I I don't
know here's the difference it's my
favorite movie and you've made 100 mov
so
so okay okay okay all right so then
everyone sort of decides that he's the
one okay right when he's like pulling
Trinity up the helicopter as it comes he
is the one I told you he is the one he
he is the one do you believe it now
Trinity that
was I don't know what it means to
compliment you on exactly
imitating what you hate to do in a movie
and I would say hey you should be that
character but too late already been done
no but the weird thing is you're not
imitating that Char you were that
character yes even
that yes yes yes um so let's fast
forward towards the end M he gets shot
Point Blank right by Smith
yes
yes then and he drops he drops he keeps
firing into him yes okay just all right
do you know how many bullets he put in
them I don't you don't I don't I will
tell you tell me okay it requires a
little bit extrapolation okay okay the
bullets you see M it's like four bullets
point blank to the chest okay at that
point we go back to the Nebuchadnezzar
MH and you see his body responding okay
but what if you track the rate bullets
are being fired yeah and continue them
into that scene mhm then we come out of
the scene and there's a few more bullets
that you observe right that's 14 bullets
okay okay okay there are 14 Stations of
the Cross I didn't know a Catholic
Church I didn't know that now for non
Catholics out there uh in every Church
Catholic Church in the typically in the
pillars that surround the main open area
from the side areas mounted face ing
inward are 14 drawings paintings relief
maps of the 14 they're called stages of
the Cross okay yeah and they're key
moments in Jesus's life and it's an
early movie really oh the word movie
doesn't even exist exactly right but a
sequence visual it's a visual sequence
okay and it's it's all of it and it's uh
he's tried under punches pilot he
carries the cross he's put up on the
cross he dies on the cross okay it so
it's all you can look it up on any you
know stages of the Cross yes 14 bullets
now interesting and he dies right then
he's resurrected resurrected right there
it comes back more powerful than ever
before that's right is that not Jesus
that's Jesus all time joining the the
side of God that's Jesus all day all day
yeah all day all night so who's
Trinity well okay so we got it like in
the Catholic that that would have to be
Mary Magdalene okay but I'm thinking let
me she take to a sex club that's where
they meet at the sex club was that a sex
club that's a sex club no yes they were
just dancing no it's a sex club look
behind and you looking deep in the
background they didn't allow them to
show all of that but it's a sex club
really mhm okay Mary Magdalene right
there and who's
Morpheus uh in the in the mythology I
know I'm trying to he's the Baptist John
the Baptist he's John the Baptist oh
because John the Baptist knows Jesus is
coming yes he knows who he is and sets
everything up and he's been looking for
him yeah he been looking for him and
when he meets him he goes I'm supposed
to be baptized by
you so that's who Morpheus is in the
Christ mythology in the Christ but
there's also
mythology Greek mythology with tell me
tell me there's well Morpheus is the
Lord of dream it's the god of dream all
right from Greek mythology right
pranie who's in the second or third
movie who was played by Monica beluchi
mhm the Oracle is Greek that's a that's
an actual Oracle the Oracle is Greek
yeah too bad we lost her before the
second film she was really a strong
character naobi there's an element on
the periodic table called niobium is
there yes there is because there's
something about the colors that were
sort of iridescent radiant okay and
something about the in the Greek legend
naobi I don't know the full story but it
had it would borrow that from Greek
legend niobium so there's there's the
Osiris there's the Nebuchadnezzar which
is also biblical there's it's also the
size of a very large bottle of wine ah
Nebuchadnezzar Nebuchadnezzar you tend
to find it only in Champagne because
that's when you it's a party King yeah
it's it's party for 30 people and you
just lean the bottle for Nez
Nebuchadnezzar of so there's you know
there's there's the
nosis there's um the
Osiris okay so so I don't want to say
mashup because that might undersell it
it's drawing from dra all all these
Traditions it it draws from Western
tradition spiritually religiously and
Eastern tradition spiritually and
philosophically as well especially yeah
because scenes are not just simple
scenes you have to think about them no
what's going on here and why right right
like when I saw the film for the first
time I had forgotten about all of that
because we had to trained so hard to get
the physical stuff right oh yeah that I
forgot about all of the philosophy and
all of the sort of Rel you come in and
film your scene and go back to the
trailer it's not no it's not that simple
it's not that simple it's it's it was it
was a year of work but so much of it was
physical and we had to work so hard to
do that MH that I really forgot about
the stuff that's in the dialogue like my
favorite
stuff is in that first encounter I have
with him and I'm asking him do you know
why you're here and I'm
saying do you know why you're here see I
and this is what has brought you to me
and that whole thing about do you know
what the Matrix is and I
go it's all around us you can feel it
when you go to church and all that stuff
yeah that's my favorite stuff because
it's very it's really cryptic and it's
and it's really SC eal and ethereal and
very scary you have to deliverer it that
way otherwise it's just a line yeah it's
just a line but you to and I had
forgotten about all that stuff that's in
it and even the stuff with like Joe
pants and the Agents when he's talking
to them and he's having the dinner oh
yes he's having his steak that's very
that's that's almost ASMR yeah okay
because he's he's he's eating the steak
and he push the and he's eating it and
he's like I know this steak isn't real
but my mind and I don't care is telling
me
it okay so we have a deal oh yeah yeah
yeah and I I don't want to remember
nothing
nothing all that my body all that stuff
is just you know it's fantastic yeah
every every so so that's my so the the
religious line through it and no one
doesn't love the idea of a savior I mean
this is that's right and and a plausible
savior right he didn't show up as
Superman right this he had to find it in
himself just the way the Oracle had
required of yeah yeah so that's why it's
your favorite movie because it reminds
you of Jesus uh
no no I I I I respect storytelling right
and the stories that have outlived
civilizations and and and the story of
the Christ is indeed that's there a
powerful story that's there it's very
powerful very powerful so there's all of
that and then there's a few more things
okay they they tossed in it was a little
bit they stapled it on when the when the
Oracle says watch out for the for that
glass and he says what glass and he
turns around and it drops and he drops
and she says that class yeah now here's
going to be eating your craw would you
have done it if I didn't you exactly
okay it's one of these future you know
did trying to avoid the future make that
future happen so I I thought that was
unnecessary cuz the movie was already
deep and that was almost cliche sci-fi
time you know future prediction sure
sure I thought the movie was above that
but fine I liked it I thought it was
clever because of what they did the way
they set it up uhhuh with the know
thyself sign oh above right and they set
it up with that uhhuh and also that
she's grandma and she's baking cookies
yeah no it was it was a full her bacon
cookies and she's in the projects like
she lives in the project those the I
don't know if people know that those are
the projects that's did they have
projects in Australia well we weren't
supposed to be in
Australia no it takes place in a modern
city yeah I think extensively Chicago
it's yes basically okay yeah yeah and I
only know that because I have the
original script oh okay
cool and so it's the L
and uh they wanted to shoot it there but
fortunately couldn't do it Heart of the
City Heart of the City heart o the city
the C Hotel um and oh and and Wabash
Avenue andash Wabash a main street in
Chicago and that's an explicitly stated
Street no I'm saying where did you guys
get the projects in Australia to film in
oh there were no we it was all loc it
wasn't location that wasn't a loc that
was that was a Sound Stage oh just set
that up yeah okay very well done yeah
that felt like the project it did that
grew up in projects and that were
middle- inome projects so there were
fewer junkies yeah yeah no but it felt
like the project I me it really did yeah
it did they they got that yeah they got
it right and a couple things uh by the
way what you think about the spoon I'm
getting there that's my next thing
sorry so I give a public talk one of
which you attended yeah I think you
attended it uh one of them is called
astrophysicist goes to the movies yes
and I show clips and then I analyze the
clip okay and the Matrix has a dozen
Clips I don't put them all in one thing
because I it's it's scientifically
themed not movie themed right so I I
have a section on Optics MH okay with
the spoon yes one side is convex one
side is concave you slurp out of the
concave side yes concave convex yes if
you look into a spoon on the convex side
right you are distorted but right side
up ah if you look on the concave side
it's upside down you are upside down and
that was accurately captured in the
freaking movie yeah yes the science was
right the SC the Optics of that the
Optics of the science was right mhm yeah
that was good that was cool I like that
yeah yeah and then the kids saying do
not do not try to move the do not try to
bend the that's impossible that's
impossible instead Bend yourself around
the spoon yeah yeah yeah I said we
that's good that's good no it's genius
man no it's good geni it's all good yeah
now here's another thing I I let it go
because everyone does it but just I'm
telling you that in almost every movie
where they show people crazily brilliant
yeah okay mhm like that's the point of
the movie because they're brilliant like
phenomenon for example with John travol
joh trol by never seen that okay it's
it's worth you know Saturday afternoon
if you're home uh he gets hit by
lightning and he was just a regular guy
right even partly mocked for not being
smart and then he wakes up and he's yeah
well after he's hit by lightning and
Robert Deval is in that as the the
person studying his new abilities anyhow
the point is he says uh name me 10
mammals or something you want an
alphabetical order and then he goes
through the whole alphabet right all
right so yes a really brilliant smart
person would do that right I don't have
a problem with that but in almost all
these cases they start moving stuff with
their with their minds with their minds
and it's like there's no evidence that
smart people can move stuff you just
figure things out faster or better okay
I'll give you that you start moving
things and then there was Lucy did you
see Lucy had to see Luca okay Morgan
Freeman was in there fun yeah and she
starts using more of her mind
changes her hair color as she's walking
down the street you know stops bullets
you know you got to be in The Matrix to
stop bullets come on now exactly you
know yeah so anyhow so the the the
hopefuls who were waiting in line to see
theti the potentials yeah so they were
doing things yeah the one kid was moving
the blocks the blocks in the air yeah
yeah so I okay fine it's fine it's a
nice visual it's kind of
cool um also the Oracle is establishing
that
Trinity is in love with him right and
he's oblivious to that okay I was kind
of oblivious to that too I I'm just you
know guys are just generally stupid you
know about these things so and she says
you're not too smart either not too
bright not too bright I don't wonder
what she sees in you oh not too bright
either yeah it's great it's really cool
yeah CU given the choice you'll have
morphus in one hand and Trinity in the
other and you know so I I think it it
was brilliantly acted by keano re where
he's in the car and they're
driving and he said good sushi I used to
have noodles I used to eat noodles there
I used to eat there good noodles really
good noodles really good noodles and he
says None of that's real and I I'm
inside of him feeling this he goes I
can't go back can I right this is he's
like even if you could would you want to
yeah I mean that was one of the hardest
choices because so many of us I mean
that's another thing forget all the
religious mythological sentiment right
it's what do you value more Cipher said
put me back in my body I you know I
don't want I don't want to know anything
I don't want to know anything but you
know I'm a scientist and I'm
curious I'd kind of rather know the
truth right
because there's some chance some hope
that you can do something about the
truth or you can do something with it do
something with
it if it's all just a delusion I don't
know that I want that to be my life
exactly let me tell you my
one issue right I only have one the only
one thing that scientifically just rubs
you the wrong way rubs me the wrong way
and the rest of the movie was so
brilliantly done I'm giving it a hall
pass my
man hall pass on the Matrix here's your
H pass that's what's up all right so
you've got the scene where you are
describing to neoh MH where he is
there's a chair there constru we're in
the construct we're in the construct
right and it's white everywhere right
brilliantly done and there's no Echo
that was perfectly done all right you
describe to
him that the machines are using humans
as batteries as batteries as a power
source as a power source and there's
some other language in there just out
that scenario here's a problem in the
laws of
thermodynamics if you have a certain
amount of energy here and you turn it
into another kind of energy M for
example there's chemical energy in
gasoline right you put that in your car
it turns it into kinetic energy to move
your car MH you ingest food which is
chemical energy and you keep your body
at body temperature temp even though
it's colder outside when you're
comfortable 72 your body is still
maintaining
98 if you if you put anything outside
at 98 Degrees it'll go down to 72
degrees even though you're saying that's
a really comfortable your body's
actively maintaining your body that
takes energy right your body's moving
you're running you're acting that takes
energy right okay it turns out anytime
you convert energy from one form to
another you don't get 100% of it you
don't get 100% no you get like oh at
best 90% uhhuh your car I forgot the
numbers the efficiency's grown over the
years car might get 30% okay of the
energy of the gas to have you move
forward got it got it you know where the
rest goes into
heat that's why the engine gets hot got
it of a combustion engine car okay we
just take it for granted of course it's
going to get hot wait a minute that's
energy I wanted to use to go forward
right that's miles per gallon wasted as
heat that's what happens when you
convert from one form energy to another
to another form of En okay so now the
laws of thermodynamics
dictate that it's not 100% you don't get
100% of your energy all right here are
the machines using humans as a form of
energy I can say how much energy we
radiate okay we depending on how big you
are all right if you're exercising or
not in that moment typically between 80
and 100 Watts okay okay okay 80 100 watt
light bulb that's how much that's what
we are so you used a battery and that's
fine rather than a bulb yeah same idea
yeah same idea that's what matters here
right okay we are an energy source for
the machines they're tapping our 100
Watts okay fine where do we get 100
Watts
from they're feeding us they're feeding
us they're feeding us right whatever
they're feeding us feed themselves with
that oh wow bypass the middle the
literal middleman the middleman why you
don't need the middle man at all right
okay you don't feed humans have them
generate energy and then have that
energy generate the machine well what
are you doing they they didn't study
Physics probably not but then there
wouldn't be a movie there wouldn't be a
great
movie you just have SM no people there'
be just like a movie that you watch and
you never get those two hours back again
and you don't have the memories and you
don't have the appreciation and the
cultural you know significance of it was
so worthy of a hall pass I gladly signed
it it really is gladly signed it over
the idea that human beings are batteries
is kind of cool it's a cool and it's
it's true idea and it's true speaking of
hall passes I was once principal for the
day at a middle school in the Bronx oh
goodness it was a program where they'
bring you in and you you'd see how the
public schools are run and thing yeah so
I didn't tell them I snuck out the pad
the principal's pad
that's his principal on the top I still
have it in my don't don't tell
anybody that's got to be the most
powerful thing safe with me safe with me
the principal notepad exactly right so I
can if I sign a hall pass it's it's
legit all good it's all good it's all
good cool so so I I'd let that one slide
but it was a brilliantly delivered scene
with the battery you don't say Duracell
but we all know what the Copper Top is
exactly and uh that was very well done
and then one character refers to him as
Copper Top in the movie yes yeah
derogatorily yeah yeah yeah yeah so the
film raised a point early on it was
early by the way just so you know do
someone generally credited with
advancing the Poss the idea that we
could be living in a matrix his name is
Nick Bostrom okay and those are into
dumpster diving we have him as a guest
on an earlier episode of Star Talk he's
an Oxford philosopher right and you can
hypothesize that if we have the ability
to create a world in a computer and the
characters in that world think they have
free will then how do you know you're
not one of those characters right that
are created right now if they have free
will and they invent computers and they
want game time they might create a
computer world within their computers
right and if they have think they have
free will then they could do the same
thing it's that all the way down exactly
and so if you close your eyes and throw
a dart I'm simplifying his argument but
this is the essence of close your eyes
and throw a dart which Universe are you
most likely to hit one of these
simulated universes or the one real one
that started them all and so that's a
terrifying Prospect that's a frightening
question frightening question that the
Matrix sits in the middle of yeah in the
middle and so my best rebuttal to that
right was by the way the last Universe
has to evolve to get computers and
program and right all right we currently
do not have the ability or the computing
power to create a perfect world where
people think they have free will we
don't have that ability yet no we don't
well if we don't have that ability yet
we're not any of the ones in the middle
that do have that ability nope so we're
either the last one the last simulated
universe that hasn't gotten there yet or
we're the original universe that hasn't
gotten there yet M logic tells you that
yeah so we go from the odds are like
99.999% chance we are to one and two
okay that's how I got out of this one
that's pretty good me feel feel a little
better about that that's very clever I I
was just talking about like the
phones and virtual lives that people are
living online oh that's what I was like
oh that's like not you you think so you
become your own avatar yeah people are
having I mean people are living virtual
lives on their phones and on their
computers and they create these avatars
for themselves and post and look at me
and all that and it feels like the life
that they live on their device is more
important than their life here in the
here and now in the real world remind me
of Chris Rock who said anytime you meet
someone it's not really them it's their
representative it's the person they want
you to think they are they are and
online does that better than anything
yes it allows you to sort of present
present what you wish people to think of
you and the way you want people to
perceive you so is this our first step
will we one day step into that character
and you become your online character I
don't know here's what I think though I
did this it can happen let's say you're
dying and we say we can upload your
Consciousness and have you occupy all
these spaces you have established online
exactly so I did a science thing this
thing called year million have you seen
this thing no all right so year million
yeah it's a limited series was about
four episodes and it's all about the
singularity you've heard of The
Singularity so it's the hypothesis is
the singularity and when that's going to
happen and when it all becomes sentient
and when and ultimately what will happen
is we will evolve to this point where we
integrate with the technology okay and
that thing you just described about
being able to upload your Consciousness
into a matrix is kind of but it's
that'll happen way sooner than the year
million well according to this show and
the science behind the show I didn't I
wasn't responsible for the science I'm
just the narrator The Singularity this
event is is is not as close as we think
and it's not as far as we think either
okay all right that's a all right that's
that's I'm say 150 years ago we were in
horse and buggy yes and now we have
Rovers on Mars okay right but what's
Happening Here is what's important not
what's happening out there cuz I mean
even to even to get out there we don't
have the infrastructure to do that yet
no not yet and it's going to take a long
time to figure that out wait so
straighten me out the Matrix was when
you're not in reality got it yes okay so
when you're in The Matrix most people as
they say you know you take out her
garbage garbage yeah you go to church
you go to church you go to work you got
to
work yeah and but you can feel it yes so
who in the movie are only the hackers
the one who felt it the ones with great
computing power no would everyone have
felt it I would like to think that
everyone felt it but not everyone paid
attention in other words most people
chose to ignore the feeling okay and
then there were certain people who
couldn't ignore the feeling there it is
because I I wake up and I have these
feelings
uhoh something getting ready to happen
man no so I wonder more often than I
should why is it that I wake up every
day as myself how come I don't wake up
as another person why am I consistently
myself every day and then I wondered is
that even true do I actually wake up as
different people every day thinking I
was always that person and why am I
having these
thoughts you should have been an actor
man cuz then that wouldn't bother you
you could just wake up you would wake up
and be whoever you wanted to be that
day I saw your oneman show feel like
Tiny Tim I know I saw your oneman show
downtown at the uh Perman Center and it
was a series of skits and you were
completely different characters in every
skit the different characters the
different tonalities different body
gestures sure yeah yeah acting is not
just did you deliver the line right no
did you did your did your body
participate in the deliver
it's you know it's the storytelling
thing it's the characterization thing
it's the physicality thing uh but
essentially you know that show was thing
I've been working on forever and ever
and just congratulations on that thank
you and it's just you know those five
characters that I do plus myself as you
know an adult and as a child and as a
younger man and all that but thank you
thank you for coming to see it yeah yeah
no that was good that was good it was
beautiful so uh there so many great
actors where you part the curtains and
somewhere in there they've done
Shakespeare yes right and you you were
athow yes I did Shakespeare I did athow
on screen with Kenneth Brana oh yeah
he's a big Shakespeare guy he's a great
Shakespeare actor and uh IR jaob yeah
back in 1995 yeah yeah okay the street
cred Shakespeare cred I got a little
shake shake it up a little bit yeah it
was fun it was it was great fun I
haven't done it live which is one of the
things I hope to do in the future in
fact I'm engaged to do it at the
Pearlman I'm engaged to do king leer at
the Pearlman sometime in the near future
yeah wow I'm going to do that's an
important story right there it's a great
story oh wow some say it's arguably one
of the greatest plays ever written for
me it's up there just for the messaging
right yeah that it is it's powerful for
me Shakespeare the challenge is here's
this very awkward sentence to anyone's
modern years and you got to deliver it
like that's exactly what you would have
said in that moment in that moment at
that time and that's hard well he's a
better poet than we will ever be
actors so wait wait pause I got to okay
I have to credit I have to credit I have
to catch up with that sentence I just
have to credit that with Kenneth Brana
Kenneth Brana said that to me when we
were doing aell okay he said Shakespeare
is a better poet than we will ever it
gave me something to take comfort in and
to and it allowed me to relax mhm and
and not try like I'm never going to be
as great an actor as Shakespeare was a
writer okay I don't so I don't have to
try to do that all I need to do really
is be mindful and surrender to the
language and try to speak the language
with as much ease and dexterity as
possible it's surrender to the language
I like that uh I was in the Oregon in i
i attended the Oregon Shakespeare
Festival oh yes up in Ashland Oregon
just just recently I've never been oh oh
my gosh it's the whole culture is
embedded in the town
and I saw cor lanus for the very first
time oh I just saw it in in London with
David O yeah okay it's it's it's one of
the most violent things oh ever written
oh yeah okay except their version now
this sounds like oh they're just trying
to be woke okay their version was played
by women and
nonbinary actors wonderful but all women
yeah yeah okay okay and you say well why
are they doing that what's the point of
that here's why if when you see guys
being violent you say there's just guys
being violent you see a woman
threatening to someone's throat our
cultural our a culturalization says
that's especially violent because women
don't go running around threaten each
other with knives and swords and and
this it's not a thing in our culture and
in our literature when you see women
doing it it brought the violence to a
whole other level that I think I would
missed otherwise it was just unless you
were in a woman's prison unless in a in
a woman's prison okay you say that like
You' been you've been I haven't but I'm
assuming okay yeah no so it was a it
took me to now it just take five minutes
to adjust to it but then it's like every
act of violence was more violent because
of that so people just exploring ways to
get out of a story things that you
wouldn't wouldn't otherwise know um
right what's this with you and the
American Academy of was made a member of
the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences last year well congratulations
thank you I was so honored I was so
surprised my friend David Anderson who
is a scientist who's in Pasadena
California nominated me and then that
was a dig cuz I didn't cuz you didn't my
friend Neil de Tyson didn't and then my
other friend so was that a dig I don't
know Francis Ford Copa is the other
person who seconded my nomination so of
course you know cuz he directed he
directed apocalypse and rumblefish and
Cotton Club and one from the heart and
these are all your movies you're in
right uh I was in one from the heart but
I got cut out of it thank God I was
mercifully cut out of it and then a
movie called Gardens of Stone which is
the only time I ever worked with James
Earl Jones the late great James Earl
Jones and then most recently megalopolis
oh that's on my list yeah yeah I've seen
which is beautiful I've seen previews
it's really beautiful so I I sort of
know cop
we met a couple of times just
overlapping paths and his film the
conversation is is second just below the
Matrix as my favorite it's a very tight
brilliant story but really cerebral
cerebral yes I'm there cereal I identify
with the main character who is himself
geeky and a little socially awkward
socially awkward but also in a world of
his own yes and very very much isolated
yes that's well it's part of you you
know back then with you a geeki you are
isolated in your geek now we all found
each other at ComiCon but back then you
know that was not how it happened but
then he also has this this reach this
power that allows him to sort of enter
into other people's worlds and their
lives as well that's a way to say that I
thought about it that way yeah okay plus
he came to one of my public talks and he
gifted me one of his wines yeah I think
he acquired The ingelnook Vineyards and
then became Copa and he done some other
things
yeah so I had a little overlap with him
but otherwise he's an incredible man and
I I I so he was nominated you he
nominated me for the American Academy
but he's really the guy that's
responsible for me becoming the kind of
artist that I am wow my exposure the
things that he exposed me to and the way
in which he trained me and and and the
way in which I worked with him is really
kind of how I've managed to do what I do
mhm so let me tell people how we first
met yeah okay I'm filming Cosmos in the
desert in New Mexico which has a lot of
tax incentives tax incentives for for
movies so a whole movie industry and
sci-fi lore kind of hovering in around
the
culture am I not allowed to say that did
I say I'm I'm sorry but am I not allowed
to talk about did you visit Area 51
while you were there well then who were
you to talk about I'm just say I visited
Area 51 I'm just saying it's lore it's
like visited Area 51 well I did a story
about it on History's Greatest Mysteries
I'll have you know matter of fact two
episodes were dedicated to Area 51 and
the Roswell incident yeah all right well
if you visit if you visit Roswell yeah
the lamp posts have green alien lamp
shades on them alien heads oh so once
you go there there's no there's no
turning back it's built into your the
economy of the city you got to keep
pumping that so back to the real story
oh sorry sorry so I'm there and our
cinematographer is Bill Pope Bill Pope
and and I said Bill what other work you
done oh well I filmed the Matrix it was
like can I touch you right and so we I
couldn't stop talking about the Matrix
with him then I was wondering can I get
to do that in the cosmos what can he
do little bullet time in the COS do some
bullet time surely you got something up
your sleeve where I can do something
cool but then I I I learned I forgotten
how that you were filming the signal the
signal not too far in the nearby City
yeah in Albuquerque in Albuquerque yes
yes cuz I was outside of town and near
Santa Fe and the point is I what was it
I but then I I forgot then I connected
with you Bill Pope connected us somehow
okay but but I brought you back yeah and
then you hadn't seen him in a while I
hadn't seen him in years so there was
like Timeout on the set mhm Cosmos and
the three of us just boogie down for a
bit yeah that was fun and there was a
beautiful sort of rainstorm that was
approaching the studio where you guys
were shooting yeah what's fun is because
you have Vistas to the Horizon you you
see the rainstorm pick up the D see we
can see it coming yes and it was like
something out of a movie and then you
see the coloration of the sky the pinks
and the blues then you're reminded this
is where Georg O'Keefe where do you
think she got her colors from exactly it
was her life her Horizons her Skies so
yeah and I'm I'm I'm delighted that
we've been friends since then me too man
I really I because again I'm I've always
been interested in in science uh and
astronomy and the
future um and what it's going to look
like and obviously science fiction yes
clearly um so to have befriended you and
to learn so much stuff from you you know
even when we're not sitting down like
just the fact that you came back with
Cosmos cuz I watched Cosmos as a
child right we both watched that as as
children it was so inspiring to think of
not just the world but the cosmos in
that in that larger sense what it did
was it wasn't just a separate subject
that you study and then return back to
your home base it folded it in to not
only your knowledge base but your state
of mind yes exactly exactly it opened
your mind to the possibility in a way
that you can't even think of that series
as a
documentary we need a different word for
it because absolutely right cuz a
document let me sit down and let me
watch this do when I come up with the
word I'll let you know please and if you
come up with a better one then you can
have the CNN
gig horse trading on the deep voice and
this has been Star
Talk okay and then say uh as always I
bid you to keep looking up go as always
I bid you to keep looking
up right
cut that's a wrap
[Music]